So, the first thing we do, is add a ServletContextEvent.
This is the application listener.
We'll have a simple class that implements ServletContextListener and
add some simple logging to see what is going on.
We'll add an entry to the web.xml file to make this an event.
To do that in the project, in the com.mantiso package,
let's add an event package.
Inside here, add a new Java class, we'll call this AppListener,
and we'll have this class implement ServletContextListener.
The first thing to notice here is that even though we're
implementing the ServletContextListener interface,
we do not have to implement any of the methods on that interface.
If we look at the ServletContextListener,
both those methods are marked as default.
That means that in this case, we don't need to implement all the methods,
or in fact any of them, just those that we care about,
which means in this case just the contextInitialized method.
We can copy the method over and make it public rather than default.
This method gets called when the application is loaded.
In here, we can log out when the context has been initialized.
We do that by using the ServletContextEvent.
This is a getServletContext method that returns the ServletContext,
and that is a log method.
Inside the log method, we'll add the message Context initialized.
The next thing to do is to add the entry to the web.xml file.
So if we open that file in the webapp, WEB-INF directory,
inside here we can add a listener entry,
this is a listener-class, and this class is com.mantiso .events .AppListener.
And adding this entry tells the servlet container that this is a listener.
When it loads the class, it sees that it implements ServletContextListener,
and so it knows to call Context initialized when the context is loaded.
So we can now deploy the application.
If we look in Tomcat's log file, we will see that it's currently empty.
If we now browse the website and refresh the page,
and go back to the log files, we see a line which says Context initialized.
So this shows that the context was loaded.
This called the contextInitialized event in our class,
and we logged this message to the file.
Servlet context listeners will often want to access context parameters,
and we have some of those set up.
Inside the web.xml files, you can see the context parameters we already have.
The one we have is the ProductName,
and we've used that in the application where we grab this
name and display it on the web page.
So if we go back to the listener code and change it slightly,
we'll make multiple use of the ServletContext,
so let's grab that and save it to a variable.
We can then use it to print the log message.
We can then use the ServletContext to get a ProductName from
the context parameter and print it out.
If we deploy the application, hit the browser and refresh,
then go back to the log file, we can see the two entries.
The first is the original message, and the second shows the use of the context parameter.